# Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement with Everyday Life - Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi

> Part psychological study, part self-help book, Finding Flow is a prescriptive guide that helps us reclaim ownership of our lives. Based on a far-reaching study of thousands of individuals, Finding Flow contends that we often walk through our days unaware and out of touch with our emotional lives. Our inattention makes us constantly bounce between two extremes: during much of the day we live filled with the anxiety and pressures of our work and obligations, while during our leisure moments, we tend to live in passive boredom. The key, according to Csikszentmihalyi, is to challenge ourselves with tasks requiring a high degree of skill and commitment. Instead of watching television, play the piano. Transform a routine task by taking a different approach. In short, learn the joy of complete engagement. Thought they appear simple, the lessons in Finding Flow are life-altering.

[GoodReads](https://www.goodreads.com/en/book/show/66321)

## Notes:

- To live means to experience-through doing, feeling, thinking. Experience takes place in time, so time is the ultimate scarce resource we have
- Watching TV, which on the average takes up the most psychic energy of all leisure pursuits, is probably also the most novel form of activity in human experience. Nothing men and women have done so far during the millions of years of evolution has been as passive, as addictive in the ease with which it attracts attention and keeps hold of it
- A woman who says she is happy to work two jobs to keep a roof over her children's head is probably in fact happier than a woman who doesn't see why she should have to bother with even a single job.
- Without dreams, without risks, only a trivial semblance of living can be achieved.
- both intrinsic motivation (wanting to do it) and extrinsic motivation (having to do it) are preferable to the state where one acts by default, without having any kind of goal to focus attention
- it is not necessarily true that the person who achieves most will have the highest self-esteem. Contrary to what one would expect, Asian-American students who get excellent grades tend to have lower self-esteem than other minorities who are academically less successful, because proportionately their goals are set even higher than their success. Mothers who work full-time have lower self-esteem than mothers who do not work at all, because although they accomplish more, their expectations still outpace their achievements.
- From this it follows that contrary to popular wisdom, increasing children's self-esteem is not always a good idea-especially if it is achieved by lowering their expectations.
- Another characteristic of flow activities is that they provide immediate feedback. They make it clear how well you are doing.
- Flow tends to occur when a person's skills are fully involved in overcoming a challenge that is just about manageable
- The happiness that follows flow is of our own making, and it leads to increasing complexity and growth in consciousness.
- we see that happiness is highest when eating, when in active leisure, and when talking with people; it is lowest when working on the job or around the house
- A person who grows up experiencing most of the day as neither important nor enjoyable is unlikely to find much meaning in the future.
- The double jeopardy a family and a career imposes can be a heavy burden on the self-esteem of women. In a study of mothers of small children who worked either full time, part time, or only a few hours a week, Anne Wells found that the highest levels of self-esteem were reported by women who worked least, and the lowest by those who worked mostthis despite the fact that all women enjoyed working outside for pay more than they enjoyed working at home. Again this finding suggests the ambiguous meaning of self-esteem. Full-time, professional women with families might have lower self-esteem not because they are accomplishing less, but because they expect more from themselves than they can possibly deliver.
- Work has severe drawbacks, but its lack is worse
- It is not the external conditions that determine how much work will contribute to the excellence of one's life. It is how one works, and what experiences one is able to derive from confronting its challenges.
- Having leisure at one's disposal does not improve the quality of life unless one knows how to use it effectively, and it is by no means something one learns automatically
- one can learn more about true preferences by listening to what people say others want, rather than to what they claim they want themselves.
- there are a great many ways to make one's job more meaningful by adding value to it. A
- understanding the impact of one's actions on the whole, a trivial job can turn into a memorable performance that leaves the world in a better shape than it was before.
- Only when there is harmony between the goals of the participants, when everyone is invest ing psychic energy into a joint goal, does being together become enjoyable.
- survive if they don't experience something like that. . . ." Or as the historian C. Vann Woodward says of his work, which involves trying to understand the dynamics of the American South: It interests me. It is a source of satisfaction. Achieving something that one thinks is important. Without such a consciousness or motivation it seems to me that life could be rather dull and purposeless, and I wouldn't want to attempt that kind of life. Of complete leisure, say, of having absolutely nothing to do that one felt was worth doingthat strikes me as a rather desperate situation to be in.
- Another interesting finding is that the autotelic group spends a significantly higher amount of time interacting with the family-on the order of four hours a week-compared to the others. This begins to explain why they learn to enjoy more whatever they are doing. The family seems to act as a protective environment where a child can experiment in relative security, without having to be self-conscious and worry about being defensive or competitive. American child rearing has emphasized early independence as a central goal: the sooner adolescents left their parents, emotionally as well as physically, the earlier they were supposed to mature. But early maturity is not such a great idea. Left to fend for themselves too early, young people can easily become insecure and defensive. It could be argued, in fact, that the more complex the adult world in which they have to find a place, the longer a period of dependence an adolescent needs in order to prepare for it. Of course this "social neoteny" only works if the family is a relatively complex unit that provides stimulation as well as support; it would not help a child to stay dependent on a dysfunctional family.
- There are literally millions of potentially interesting things in the world to see, to do, to learn about. But they don't become actually interesting until we devote attention to them.
- think it's that rubbishy part of myself, that part which is described by such words as vanity, pride, the sense of not being treated as I should be, comparison with others, and so on. I've tried rather hard to discipline that. And I've been lucky that there has been enough that's positive to enable me to counter a kind of biliousness and resentment ... which I've seen paralyze colleagues of mine, peers who are more gifted than I. I've felt it in myself. And I've had to learn to counter that. I
- One cannot lead a life that is truly excellent without feeling that one belongs to something greater and more permanent than oneself
- Act always as if the future of the Universe depended on what you did, while laughing at yourself for thinking that whatever you do makes any difference
- With this attitude one does not need to win to feel content; helping to maintain order in the universe becomes its own reward, regardless of consequences. Then it is possible to find joy even when fighting a losing battle in a good cause.
